[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Since the dawn
of modern humans,
every culture in every region
practiced what some would call
shamanism.
This mystical
practice is scarcely
understood but not forgotten.
In the 1960s, amateur
ethnomycologist, Gordon Wasson,
wrote his first
book titled, "Soma--
Divine Mushroom of
Immortality," after noticing
the indigenous mushroom
culture in Siberia.
Siberian shamans would collect
the fly agaric or Amanita
muscaria mushrooms, and
either dried and ate them
or would feed them to reindeer
and drink the urine to get
the effects free of nausea.
Because this culture neighbored
ancient Indian culture,
Wasson surmised that
the Amanita muscaria
mushroom must be the lost
ingredient of the drink, Soma.
Soma was the sacred and
psychedelic beverage
of ancient India.
But how could this
mushroom have ended up
in a foreign
religious sacrament?
This drove Wasson to
dig deeper to discover
what shamanism truly is.
>> The term itself came from
the Siberian cultures and was
brought into English
through Russian and German.
And people started
to recognize it
as a phenomenon that was found
in many parts of the world
and started applying it to
Native American practices,
into Australian practices,
and things like this.
What really is a
shaman kind of depends
on the perspective we take.
>> So the shaman is like
a spiritual bounty hunter.
He or she deliberately
induces these altered states
with drugs or other means.
But then, they don't just
sit there and have the trip.
They can actually actively
navigate in that world.
>> The shamans have attained
a sufficient sophistication
to explicitly understand that
the vessel of our chemical
transformation is the body.
And the plants lift the
imprisoning structures
of the ego.
And the ego flows
out into the world.
>> Beyond the confines of
small tribes in Siberia,
author Gordon Wasson discovered
that larger societies were also
using psychedelic plants as
a form of societal shamanic
ritual.
>> Even in studying
the Hindu culture,
the Ganges River comes
out of Shiva's top knot.
In very many depictions, you
see a picture of a cannabis leaf
on top of Shiva's head.
And also, he's holding a vessel
that contains bhang, B-H-A-N-G,
which is a cannabis-containing
beverage that is flavored with
cinnamon and cardamom
and other spices.
And I was also very interested
to learn about the Eleusinian
Mysteries.
>> The Eleusinian Mysteries
in ancient Greece clearly had
a psychedelic sacrament.
We even know what it was now.
It a form of ergot
that grows on barley.
Was used in a beverage
called the kykeon
that initiates of the
Eleusinian Mysteries drank.
And then, they had extraordinary
and life-changing experiences
in the dark halls.
They were addressing,
setting there as well.
These experiences were
underwent and undergone
in a place called the
Telesterion, which
was underground and in
darkness, probably dimly
lit with little
lamps here and there,
creating a setting for the
experience to unfold in.
And the initiates of the
Eleusinian Mysteries,
who included people like
Plato, people like Socrates,
people like Cicero, came
out, and afterwards,
reported that their
lives had been utterly
transformed by the experience
that they had undergone.
They had lost their
fear of death.
They knew that they
were immortal spirits,
that they were just temporarily
housed in a human body.
>> From ancient India to Greece,
psychedelic plants have been
used for deeply spiritual
quests and large-scale healing.
But what was the first
well-organized psychedelic
society?
Scholars and historians had
all but given up on uncovering
the mysterious beginnings of the
shamanic society, when in 1976,
Soviet archaeologist
Viktor Sarianidi unearthed
the 4,000-year-old temple
complex in present day
Turkmenistan.
This complex is nearly a
half a million square meters
divided into a large northern
and smaller southern region.
Its walls, made of clay
bricks, span 120 by 150 meters
and were reinforced by
20 rectangular towers.
Roughly 6500 to 1700
BC, the northern region
was burned down, and the whole
complex was abandoned quickly,
leaving the mystery
of its origins
only with the
artifacts found there.
Author and researcher
Chris Bennett
spent years investigating
the spread of cannabis
in the ancient world and began
piecing the puzzle together
from this location.
>> The debate about Soma and
Haoma, the origins of them,
has changed lately because
of archaeological finds.
And one of the
really important ones
is the work of the Russian
archaeologist Viktor Sarianidi.
He wrote about this
in his book, "Margiana
and Protozoroastrism."
And Sarianidi he was doing
work in the outer regions
of Afghanistan, in an area
known as the Bactria-Margiana
Archaeological Complex.
And in this region, he found
a number of temple sites,
and these were big temples,
about the size of a football
field.
And half of the
temple sites were
dedicated to the preparation of
this beverage, which Sarianidi
has identified as Soma,
Haoma, the sacred beverage
of the Persians and the
Indians-- ancient Indians.
>> It is still debated whether
this lost city of Gonur Tepe
had a supreme ruler or simply
an elite class and high priest.
In many ways, the priests
of larger civilizations
mirrored the role of the
predecessor, the shaman.
>> So, the shaman in the
traditional role is basically
a liaison for the community to
this realm of the supernatural
and these supernatural forces.
So, in that sense, it's kind
of a priest-like function.
>> At Gonur Tepe, the high
priest was the gatekeeper
to spiritual and
psychedelic experiences.
The psychedelic trip
has been equated
to a mystical
experience, as it allows
the user to peek behind the
veil of cultural conditioning.
And the high priest was the
one that bestowed these vision
quests upon the people.
Only through his
approval were commoners
allowed to drink this sacrament.
Gordon Wasson claimed that
the Amanita muscaria mushroom
was the psychoactive
ingredient in Soma and Haoma
because of the mushroom's
common use in nearby areas.
But this claim is unproven, and
some believe quite implausible,
due to the kind of experience
these mushrooms elicit.
Amanita muscaria
mushrooms have been
known to cause euphoria but
also nausea, sweating, cramping,
and salivation.
So, the mystery has
continued through the ages,
until Victor Sarianidi sent
scraping samples from Gonur
Tepe out to be analyzed.
>> Based on archaeological
evidence that's recently come
up in the last decades, they
found big bowls in the ground
where the Soma would have
been ground with mortars
and pestles, and then
also straining devices,
as well as bowls, with
fossilized remnants in it.
And so they took some of these
fossilized remnants, which
was like a fossilized liquid
substance, and had it tested.
And they found evidence
of cannabis, ephedra,
and in some cases, poppy.
And all these plants grow in
this region as well, still.
>> Poppy is the base
ingredient for opium,
which elicits a sedative and
euphoric effect, while ephedra,
the basic ingredient
for amphetamines,
is a stimulant and
appetite suppressant.
And lastly, cannabis elicits
a slightly psychedelic effect
with an increase in appetite,
causing this beverage
to act as a symphony of
mind-altering ingredients
for these ancient
Indo-European cultures.
>> And it's interesting it has
his counterpart in the Avestan
religion over in Persia,
where it's known as Haoma.
Because of language similarities
and mythological similarities--
they're both
Indo-European languages--
this combined use and identity
indicates a much older origin
from an identical call, so
going considerably far back
into history.
We know that they were
involved in trades
with another
Indo-European culture
living in central China,
known as the Gushi Culture.
And we found numbers of
perfectly preserved specimens
of both cannabis and
ephedra at this site.
And it's likely that these
Indo-Europeans living in China,
who were exporting
cannabis, were
likely the suppliers of the
Bactria-Margiana Archaeological
Complex's use of it and
delivered by Scythians.
My view is that the
Chinese term for cannabis,
which is [NON-ENGLISH],,
traveled with cannabis
into the Bactria-Margiana
Archaeological Complex with
this name that became Haoma
and then through dialectical
changes as it reached into
India became Soma in the Vedic
language.
>> Along several
ancient trading routes,
the nomadic horseback Scythians
had burial kurgans that were
recently unearthed.
Not only were
golden vessels found
containing remnants
of cannabis and opium,
but the frozen tundra preserved
the tattoos on their skin,
depicting animals
warping and spiraling,
as if seen in a
psychedelic trance.
Ancient Greek
historian Herodotus
recorded the funerary
rites of the Scythians
as they built tripod tents
and fumigated cannabis seeds
inside.
But this wasn't the
only place in history
we see the use of a tent
with smoke and vapor.
>> There is a
Polish entomologist
and anthropologist, Sula Benet,
who suggested that this Hebrew
term, [? canabasin ?] was a
reference to cannabis and that
this reference appears for the
first time in the Exodus 30.23,
where God who--
appears to Moses
in flames of fire
from within a burning
bush, commands
Moses to make a
holy anointing oil.
And every time that Moses
has to speak the Lord,
he has to go inside
this enclosed tent--
a little area called "the
tent of the meeting."
And he covers
himself in this oil.
And he also places some of the
oil on the altar of incense.
And he speaks to the Lord
and the pillar of smoke
over the altar of incense.
None of the other Israelites
in the biblical story
ever see or hear the Lord.
They can only tell if Moses
is talking to the Lord
if smoke is pouring out of
the tent of the meeting.
>> Moses is believed by
historians to have lived
in the 16th century BC, just
after the period of Gonur Tepe
and connected to the
same trade routes.
The phenomena of inhaling
mind-altering substances
in order to speak
to divine sources
are also seen with
the Oracle of Delphi,
which ranged from
the eighth century
BC and possibly earlier, in
the late Mycenaean times.
The scholar Martin
Litchfield West
wrote that the
Pythia, or Oracle,
exhibited Central Asian shamanic
practices, as she reportedly
sat upon a tripod above a chasm
from which vapors poured forth
as she inhaled them
and prophesized.
If it is true that these
age-old stories show
a deep appreciation for
mind-altering plants,
how much farther back can
we trace shamanic traditions
into history?
>> That evidence, we first
encounter it in the painted
caves of upper-Paleolithic
Europe going back close
to 40,000 years ago.
And curiously enough, just
quite recently in Indonesia was
discovered a series
of painted caves,
which date back to more or
less exactly the same period,
the high 30,000s almost
40,000 years ago in the past.
There are certain types
of imagery that regularly
and routinely crop up
in those deeply altered
states of consciousness
brought on by psychedelics.
And it's precisely those
types of the imagery
that we find in the
ancient rock and cave art
all around the world.
You'll often find geometry in
the paintings or engravings.
You will find-- and
this is really quite
diagnostic-- you will find
creatures that are referred
to as therianthropes.
That's from the Greek therian,
which means wild beast,
and anthropos, which means man.
They're hybrid human
and animal figures.
>> Not only were these visionary
illustrations important enough
to appear in humanity's earliest
art in the painted caves,
but they were also
immortalized in the flesh,
as the therianthropic paintings
on the cave walls conjure
similar imagery to that
of the Scythian tattoos.
There are remnants
of shamanic practices
in every corner of the globe.
Might we also find references
to psychedelics in the creation
myth of the Bible?
>> If you look at the
imagery that is conjured up
of the serpent in
the Garden of Eden--
I mean, I'm not saying that
painters in the 14th century
actually saw the serpent
in the Garden of Eden.
But if you look at
the imagery that's
conjured up, very often--
actually, I would say about
eight times out of 10,
you'll find that that
serpent is a therianthrope,
that that serpent has a
serpent body and a human head,
for example.
Or it may be equipped
with arms and legs
off-- branching off that
serpent body in some cases.
So right there,
there's a suggestion
that we're dealing with a
classic entity of vision.
In the mainstream
Christian position
on the serpent in
the Garden of Eden,
is that it represents the
devil, the bad guy who's
come to tempt and
mislead Adam and Eve.
But the very powerful
alternative point
of view provided
by the Gnostics is
that the serpent was one of the
ancient teachers of mankind,
that he's coming to
say to Adam and Eve,
you need to learn the difference
between good and evil.
If you go back to
the book of Genesis,
the forbidden fruit is the
knowledge of good and evil.
That's what the-- that's
what that tree is.
It's the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil.
And its fruit is
therefore- is therefore
the knowledge of good and evil.
But is there a
deeper layer to that?
Could we, indeed, be
talking about some kind
of natural psychedelic?
>> What would it mean to
discover that the forbidden
fruit that the parents of our
species ate was psychedelic
in nature?
And is it possible
that this fruit
initiated the rapid expansion
of the human neocortex?
>> Well, there's an interesting
set of findings about how
humans differ from our
chimpanzee relatives in terms
of the use of these psychedelics
and what happens in the body.
The human serotonergic
system is much more sensitive
to these substances.
The binding of the
serotonin neural receptors
with the psychedelics is two
to four times more powerful
that what happens
in chimpanzees.
>> John McPartlin
and Dr. Jeffrey Guy,
the founder of GW
pharmaceuticals,
they both have speculated that
cannabis may have played a role
in this time period, that
the psychoactive effects
of cannabis may have resulted
in new novel ways of thinking
and approaching problems.
And the creativity aspect may
have provided that element
for the great leap forward.
>> Another theory, popularized
by the McKenna brothers,
was the potential for
coprophilic spores or rather
manure-loving mushroom
species, like psilocybin,
as being the impetus for
humanity's great leap forward.
Cattle worship is seen
throughout ancient Egypt,
Greece, Israel, Rome, Germany,
and is seen in Jainism,
Hinduism, and Zoroastrianism.
Our ancient ancestors,
seeking food
in the plains and grasslands,
would have eventually found
the cattle that
grazed in the fields
and noticed a
strange mushroom that
grew from their
droppings that influenced
the lingual and problem-solving
regions of the brain.
Were cannabis and
psychedelic mushrooms
possible causes for
such drastic differences
in intelligence between modern
humans and our ancestors?
How much of our modern
society has been influenced
by our shamanic roots?
>> Really, out of shamanism come
the roots of religion for sure,
pharmacology.
But chemistry and poetry and
theater and all of these things
really find their
roots in shamanism.
>> There's a certain point
when religion doesn't want
the shamanism in there anymore.
That's really where we see the
decline of the shamanic use
of these substances,
as religions become
more politically motivated as
a means of controlling society
and organizing society.
There became, I think, both
a theological and political
desire to unify the people under
one consolidated head and rule.
>> As religious institutions
and political leaders began
combining their powers, as we
see mirrored in major corporate
mergers today, the momentum
was to keep spreading.
And at the start of what
we call the Modern period,
European nations began sending
forces to the Americas.
And as a result, indigenous
tribes were decimated,
and countless generations
of shamanic wisdom
was erased from the Earth.
Was there an agenda?
If so, what was the purpose?
>> I do believe that there
are many forces that see
the psychedelic
movement as a threat.
And it's its vast.
In earlier times, it might
have been the church.
But I also see
that it's a threat
to the pharmaceutical industry.
>> Big pharma imported $86
billion in drugs and exported
$47 billion worth in 2015 alone.
The power of this industry
and its advertising sector
has forced the
world of shamanism
beneath the shadow
of Western medicine.
But what truly is the
difference between the two?
>> In shamanism, when
you have sickness,
when you have an ill
individual for any reason,
you don't do what Western
medicine does and look
for the causes of that illness
at the level of the physical
being.
The causes of that illness
are always one level above.
They're at the next level,
in the spiritual dimension.
There's a spiritual
disconnect which
is the source of this illness.
So, the shaman will address
the spiritual problem,
the nonphysical problem in
order to step down and solve
the physical problem.
In Western medicine, we
have no such concept.
Because Western
medicine doesn't even
believe in the
spirit or the soul
or any such aspect
of human beings.
Western medicine really does
regard human beings as rather
clever and sophisticated
meat robots.
But that is not--
that is not the
shamanistic view.
The shamanistic view is that we
are immersed in an incredibly
complex multi-layered
reality and that--
and that what is happening at
other levels of that reality
directly impact what happens
at the level of reality
that we inhabit.
>> This perspective on the
nature of healing is summarized
by radio host and
filmmaker Max Igan,
who has spent years traveling
the world to visit shamanic
tribes to preserve their wisdom.
>> Shamanism, it can be seen as
something integral to the human
experience.
I'm a firm believer that all
life progresses according
to the Fibonacci sequence.
If you look at
Fibonacci sequence,
how that sequence works is
you actually get the present,
and you combine it with the
past to create the future.
That's how it works.
If we can get our
present culture
and combine it with
these past ways,
we will create a viable future.
But if we discard all of
that ancient knowledge
and simply go with our
technological flow,
we're going to lead ourselves
to a very bad place.
>> A few modern healers,
such as Kimba Arem,
utilize ancestral and modern
techniques in her alternative
practices.
And her experience
has taught her
where the healing
intelligence truly
lies in terms of
shamanic ceremonies.
>> And I actually see that
rather than the shaman is
healing them, that the shaman
is activating that person's own
inner healing ability.
Because that's really
the true power,
is reminding people that
they, too, are the divine.
We're the healer.
Like if you cut your finger,
you're the one who heals it.
The doctor or the shaman
can help address the wound.
But we're actually
doing the healing work.
>> Perhaps it is the adoption of
unhealthy patterns that builds
and obstructs the pure healing
intelligence within each of us.
So if we look beyond
the cultural adornments
and poetic language, might we
find a more scientific basis
to shamanic rituals?
>> One of the things that they
did was use ritual practices,
including chanting and
singing and drumming,
that begin to change
our brain wave pattern.
The alteration of consciousness
in the shamanic ritual
starts off with a
stimulatory phase--
dancing, drumming,
singing, chanting--
to the point of exhaustion
and to the relaxation phase.
Well, this is a shift
from stimulating
the sympathetic nervous system
to the parasympathetic nervous
system.
The parasympathetic
nervous system
is the part of the nervous
system that relaxes us.
And so basically, the
relaxation response
is part of what's brought
about by ritual activities.
>> American-based psychoanalyst
Wilhelm Reich mentioned
a similar pattern when he
spoke about the four stages
of a primal pattern that
healthy cultures share--
tension, charge,
discharge, and relaxation.
It is seen in the
movement of many forms
of classical and modern music,
all forms of storytelling,
love-making, as well
as healing catalysts.
Even though the content
on top of this pattern
will always change,
the underlying flow
is what establishes a space
for a healing response.
Something must dredge
up the traumatized
psychological material from
the unconscious, which would be
during the stimulatory phase.
The contents must be
processed, breathed through,
and exacerbated in order to
bring about a critical point
when the psyche transforms
the way it holds that content.
Finally, the discharge
is a pivot point in which
breakthroughs are made--
not by the shaman, but by the
natural healing intelligence
of the one who is
seeking the remedy.
This leads to the
relaxation phase,
which allows a new unhealthy
pattern to integrate.
This is the same as what's seen
in the Savasana stage of yoga.
What other shamanic anomalies
may have a physiological
and neurological basis?
>> It Is by agreement there's
a marker at the beginning
and at the end.
You invoke the
spirit at the end.
You thank the spirits and
each other at the end.
And you move into ordinary
time-- ordinary space time.
So that's the
significance of ritual.
It's a fantastic-- to
do it in the right way,
it opens up fantastic
possibility.
Because then,
[INAUDIBLE] feel safe.
For example, if
you're in a ritual
and you're exploring
something and you--
say psychologically you're
working on your relationship
with your mother or your
father or traumatic things,
and people are laughing
back in the dining area,
cracking jokes, and
drinking whatever-- beer--
what's that gonna be like?
It's not respectful of people.
It's like trying to do therapy
in the middle of the subway.
>> It is likely that
in traditional shamanic
communities, the whole
group was not only involved
in the ceremony, but they all
had similar belief systems,
allowing all of them to be
more rooted in the customs
of their ritual.
If one person was
experiencing a healing crisis,
the rest of the group
was likely holding
space for their healing,
rather than distracting them
with unnecessary
noise or movement.
If they understood
the basic criteria
for psychological healing, are
there other shamanic anomalies
that may have a physiological
or neurological basis?
>> Shamanism has certain
characteristics that are pretty
much universal.
And a lot of what the shaman
does is retrieve souls--
illness-- mental and physical
illness in these cultures
is often understood
as a loss of souls.
The idea of the shaman
is a soul traveler
will often go to
what's conceived
as the center of the
universe, the world tree.
>> There is a well-known
phenomenon of the out-of-body
experience, or
astral projection.
Well, what we know is that
there is a particular part
of the brain that's supposed
to integrate our sense of self
with our body, the
temporal parietal junction.
And when this part of the
brain is taken offline,
then we're able to
experience ourselves
independent of our body.
>> Does this mean that the
shaman simply convinces his
or her own brain that the
mind and body are separating?
And if so, does that mean
that it's just a mirage?
Or is belief, imagination,
and creativity
the physical mechanisms by
which an aspect of the shaman
leaves his or her
body to perform work
in other dimensions?
Perhaps this is the
underlying knowledge
that shamans utilized when
crafting a healing environment.
>> Shamans become healers.
They become good artists.
They can design
their own rituals.
They create their
own music and so on.
Again, what makes
the shaman a shaman
is that he or she had
a substantial number
of personal experiences.
>> Through lifetimes of
shamanic experiences,
bringing wisdom from the other
side to this physical world,
could this be the basis
of all shamanic rituals?
What would the shamans
of today look like?
Would they still be
wearing the same clothes
and singing the same
songs, or would they
be doing brand new work
with the same spirit,
joining hearts and hands
in ancestral twine,
as Xavier Rudd would say?
And if shamans of the
past did healing work
for their village, what
would a modern shaman
truly use to get their music
and their message to the people?
If this shamanic power
is still present today,
it would be present
within all of us,
and the real tragedy
from there would
be to remain ignorant
of this gift.
The modern mindset
seems to marvel
at the latest and greatest
technology while disregarding
the importance of our heritage.
What if this is exactly why
the health of the masses
and the health of the
planet is struggling
to keep up with the rapid
changes that we are causing?
What if the passing of
each generation to the next
is a direct connection
to our shamanic ancestry
and the biological
technology of the human body
remembers all that our
lineage has been through?
And what if the remedy
to all our human problems
is simply to remember who
and what we truly are,
embodied in the heart and soul.
If psychedelic plants
and shamanic rituals
are a vital key to
unlocking our past,
is this why they've
been suppressed, feared,
and crusaded against in the
old world, as well as the new?
In the late 1400s, as
European Naval forces set out
to the New World,
they would soon
stumble upon shamanic tribes
in every corner of the Americas
with a rich history in
using psychedelic plants.
One such region in
South America would soon
reveal an ancient psychedelic
cocktail of several botanicals.
Was there any connection
between this ancient religious
sacrament and the Old
World's Soma and Haoma,
or is the shamanic phenomenon of
seeking deeply-expanded states
of consciousness through plant
medicines an innate function
of those people that
lived closest to nature?
Up next, join us as we
explore the deep mysteries
of the Amazon rain forest and
the ancient shamanic traditions
that live there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]